meantime it has been 1 month since the
international court of justice ordered
Israel to prevent genocide in Gaza the
icj gave Israel until today to submit a
report showing that it is complying with
six separate orders the court did not
find that Israel was committing genocide
that matter is still under consideration
but nevertheless issued six orders meant
to make sure genocide does not
happen the court says that Israel must
quote do everything it can to prevent
acts that could fall within the scope of
the UN convention on genocide make sure
its military does not commit any acts
covered by that convention prevent and
punish incitement that could encourage
genocide enable urgently needed basic
services and humanitarian assistance
make sure that any evidence that could
point to genocide is not destroyed
Israel was ordered to submit a report of
its compliance by today
let's get more on this we are joined by
Professor Shantal Malone she's joining
us from Berlin where she is with the
European Center for constitutional and
human rights and also an international
law professor at the University of Milan
welcome to the program and thank you so
much for joining us today um what
exactly is the hearing at the
international court of justice in the he
about yeah the case that South Africa
brought against Israel
as you rightly already recalled is about
the alleged violation of the
convention uh to prevent genocide so we
have seen on the 26th of January exactly
one month ago the court which I remember
is the highest judicial institution at
the UN level ordered very precise
provisional measures that Israel has to
take in order to stop prevent and punish
acts of genocide incitement to genocide
okay so now it is one yes sorry um I I
just want to ask you because I really
want to get to what um is supposed to be
submitted today because we know that you
know previously Israel um uh said that
it wanted this case to be thrown out the
court came back and said that indeed it
did have the jurisdiction to hear this
case can we now expect Israel to make
this report public that they are due to
present today I mean after all it is a
confidential report to the icj which
will be sent to South Africa for comment
will we get any more
information well um it's not a hearing
what is happening today the report is as
you said sent confidentially and I don't
think that there are indications that
let us think that the report will be
available to the broader public there
are some precedents the most important
in this case is the one regarding in the
case of Gambia against Myanmar we have
seen Myanmar in 2020 also having to
report back to the icj and that report
also was confidential but of course
there is a possibility that the icj uh
in case the judges decide to issue
additional provisional measures for
instance that can be taken prop Motu by
the court or also at request of South
Africa which will have access to the
Israeli report might in way summarize a
bit the content of the report in their
order in case but really there are no
indications that the state of Israel at
the moment is thinking of making the
report public to the broader public okay
um I'd like to get your legal expertise
on on a separate matter as well um
because hearings on the legality of
almost 60 years of Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian territories began a week
ago as well at the international court
of justice in the ha representatives of
50 states are taking part Israel itself
is saying is staying away from those
hearings give us a sense of what is
going on
there yeah that is a very important uh
advisory opinion that has been in the
making for many years so in a sense it
is a coincidence that now we are seeing
two cases regarding Israel at the same
time in parallel ongoing at the
international court of justice in that
case is not a state that brought Israel
in front of the court it is the general
assembly that put a legal question in
front of the judges and it is about the
legal consequences of a prolonged
occupation of the Palestinian territory
so basically what is at stake there and
we have seen a unprecedented number of
states participating in that proceeding
the whole past week has been hearings to
hear not only from the state of
Palestine but also from 55 third states
there legal reasonings will be for the
court to assess whether what's going on
since 57 years in the Palestinian
territory can still be assessed as an
occupation in case whether this is
lawful or unlawful but in the end
basically what we are talking about is
whether there is a crime of aperti or a
situation of aperti ongoing there okay
and of course that's a disputed term I'm
just very very very very briefly will
there be a verdict in in that case and
if so
when yeah we can expect uh in a few
months probably uh according to what has
been the practice of the court in other
similar cases there will be so a
advisory opinion as I said it's not a
judgment it is not the same uh procedure
as the one that we are seeing South
Africa against Israel it will not be
formally B but still very
relevant Professor Chantal Malone thank
you so much for joining us to share
share your legal expertise
today thank you for having me and I'm
joined Now by Michael Becker he was an
associate legal officer at the
international court of justice from 2010
until 2014 now he's teaching
international human rights law at
Trinity College Dublin welcome to DW
thanks so much for your time today now
Israel's report to the icj isn't
expected to be made public but do we
have any indication what might be in
this
report right you're exactly correct that
these reports are confidential reports
and the report will go to the court and
then to South Africa for South Africa's
response so we may not see this anytime
soon if ever but we can predict I think
what Israel will try to emphasize in the
report but I should say at the start
that there have been reports today for
example that prime minister Netanyahu
has asked for the report to be sparse I
think that would be a big mistake for
Israel because this is an opportunity
for Israel to try to convey to the court
uh everything that it thinks thinks it's
doing to comply with the order I would
expect Israel to focus mainly on what
Israel sees as its best efforts to
facilitate humanitarian assistance into
Gaza now whether the way Israel portrays
its efforts to deliver humanitarian
assistance would be credible to a
broader audience is a different question
but I think that that's where the
emphasis will be placed in Israel's
report okay but if the report isn't made
public I mean is anything going to come
of this because surely there'll be less
public pressure on is to to comply you
know if we don't know what's in the
report absolutely and that's a good
reason why the court should change its
practices and uh require that these
implementation reports be made public
but the the it's really for South Africa
here to play the role of having to come
back to the court and try to refute what
it may see as Israel's incomplete or
even potentially misleading narrative
about what's going on on the ground so
in some ways I actually think it's going
to be South Africa's response again a
confidential report but South Africa's
response rather than Israel's initial
report that's more important here
because this is an opportunity for South
Africa to point out omissions from
Israel's report we've heard over the
past several weeks reports about Israeli
officials directly impeding certain
efforts to deliver humanitarian
assistance there are also ways in which
South Africa can probably point out to
the court other things that are within
Israel's power to do that for whatever
reason Israel has not been doing and so
is a chance for South Africa to put
these things before the court and it may
in fact be the impetus for South Africa
now to go back to the court and request
new provisional measures or modified
provisional measures but measures that
would be much more specific much more
pric than the types of quite broadly
worded measures that the court um
imposed a month ago okay now there are
several organizations the UN Amnesty
International Etc they've all called on
Israel to comply with the icj's orders
um what happens if it doesn't do
anything briefly if you
could well we're we're in a a situation
where the courts powers of enforcement
are very limited it's not really the
Court's job to enforce its own decisions
This falls on the International
Community so we've already seen the fact
that the provisional measures from last
month have put enormous pressure on
Israel and that pressure is coming from
other countries including some of
Israel's strongest supporters so I think
that this process simply feeds into that
broader uh political Dynamic with States
including the United States putting
pressure on Israel to change its course
to find a way towards a ceasefire find a
way to resolve the hostages crisis and
very importantly find a way to deal with
the humanitarian crisis that appears to
only be getting worse Michael Becka from
Trinity College Dublin thank you so much
for your time today we appreciate it
thank
you